# X11

## Description

X11 is the 11th version of the X Window System, which provides the basic framework for building graphical user interfaces on Unix-like operating systems. It was developed in the mid-1980s at MIT and has since become a standard for GUI environments on these systems.

## Components of X11

- X Server: The core component that manages the display and input devices. It handles drawing windows, rendering graphics, and processing user input.

- Window Managers: These are programs that control the placement and appearance of windows within the X11 environment. Examples include:
    Metacity
    Openbox
    i3 (a tiling window manager)

- Desktop Environments: These provide a complete graphical user interface experience, including window management, panels, and application launchers. Popular desktop environments that use X11 include:
    GNOME
    KDE Plasma
    XFCE

X Libraries: Libraries such as libX11 provide the necessary functions for applications to communicate with the X server.

## How X11 Works

- Starting the X Server: When you start a graphical session, the X server is launched, typically by a display manager (like GDM, LightDM, or SDDM). The display manager provides a login screen and starts the X server.

- Launching Applications: Once the X server is running, you can launch graphical applications. These applications connect to the X server and request it to create windows, draw graphics, and handle user input.

- Rendering Graphics: The X server communicates with the graphics hardware to render the requested graphics. It also manages the drawing of windows, handling overlapping windows, and ensuring that user input is directed to the correct application.

## cheatsheet basics

- To know which windows server is used :
```
echo $XDG_SESSION_TYPE
```

- If the output is x11, you are using X11.
- If the output is wayland, you are using Wayland.
